---
title: The tech behind QuestDB
author: Tancrede Collard
unlisted
---


## Overview
Questdb is a high performance relational database optimised for time series. 
Each component challenges convention and is designed to be faster than any peer. 
This article gives an overview of our design choices and why they make our performance possible.
You can check out the code for yourselves on our **[github](http://github.com/questdb/questdb)**.

QuestDB is a work in progress and you can find out more about our plans in our **[roadmap](http://questdb.io/docs/roadmap)**. 
You can run the current release from **[Docker](http://questdb.io/docs/docker)** or **[binaries](http://questdb.io/docs/binaries)**.

### Statistics
First a couple statistics. QuestDB was built by a team of former low-latency traders and developers. We knew we wanted
to build something quick and our main focus has been core performance: make sure we extract the maximum of any core we use.

This may seem like an odd choice since a lot of projects would quickly turn to parallelisation to improve performance.
However, we thought there was much to do on core-efficiency and set off to push the bar further.

Today, we write single-threaded at 90+m data points per second and read single-threaded at over 230m data points per second.
This is all done using a 1.5mb binary portable across all platforms.

## Design bits

### Java & Libraries
Let's get the elephant out of the room... QuestDB is programmed in Java. 

**But...**
 
You should know this is no traditional Java. In fact we only use Java for the JVM and the JIT.
None of the Java libraries are being used. 

All the IO, including disk and network, is abstracted away in a thin JNI layer to make the underlying OS functions available to Java. 
Libraries such as collections, lists and maps are rewritten to support primitive types. 
Libraries working cohesively with CPU caches conversion routines, such as numeric to string (and vice versa), have been rewritten 
to perform better than standard libraries algorithmically. As such, the creation of intermediate objects is not required.

In addition, our code is fully zero Garbage Collection (‘GC’), which results in constant and predictable performance. 
When we say fully zero Garbage Collection, we mean it. **You can run QuestDB for centuries without triggering any GC.**


### Timestamp & Dates
QuestDB incorporates a brand new and unique date library that supports all date related arithmetic for both millisecond 
and microsecond resolution timestamps. Date to string and string to date conversion routines are compiled bytecode. 
Date format is compiled into format specific bytecode. 
**This conversion is 100x faster than widely popular JodaTime.**

### Queues
QuestDB includes high performance queues, which can provide back-pressure feedback. 
These queues are used to create tcp servers that have flow control.

### Storage
Storage is column based. Each column is a virtualized memory mapped file. 
Inside each column we find a sequence of large memory pages stitched together via an interface that makes it look like 
one contiguous memory chunk. Storage is also optimised for CPU cache efficiency.

You can find out more about our storage model **[here](http://questdb.io/docs/storagemodel)**

### SQL
The SQL system is a functional language in which a single execution plan is a chain on monads, each having as little state as possible. 
The data is lifted directly from memory pages and passed out with no or as little copying as possible. 
Avoiding copying the data may not be possible when data sets are hashed or sorted, but this generally allows for much faster execution when possible.

SQL includes an optimiser, which effectively rewrites queries to remove unnecessary steps and inefficiencies human would make otherwise. 
In particular, join and clauses, which are rewritten to trim as much data as possible from the start of the pipeline. 
This allows to lift and manipulate the least possible amount of data to ensure maximum query performance and minimum resource usage.

### Zero GC & Off heap data structures
We can access native memory instead of heap memory (memory that is managed by the JVM to represent Java objects), and as 
such manage memory ourselves instead of letting Java’s JVM manage the process. Moreover QuestDB uses does not allocate any memory along execution paths.

In other words, all the data structures ‘touched’ by the data from the database live outside Java’s heap. 
The whole system is without exaduration and thus totally zero GC.


### Heavy usage
QuestDB is able to ingest or send large amounts of data. We support **transactions size only limited by disk space**.
It has an asymmetrical ratio of active users to server threads and is able to send or receive data to/from a client that 
is available and switch over to from an idle to active client instantly.


## For more

If you want to find out more, feel free to check out our **[Github repo](http://github.com/questdb/questdb)** or to
give us a try. If you have questions or want to know more, you can find us on
 **[slack](https://join.slack.com/t/questdb/shared_invite/enQtNzk4Nzg4Mjc2MTE2LTEzZThjMzliMjUzMTBmYzVjYWNmM2UyNWJmNDdkMDYyZmE0ZDliZTQxN2EzNzk5MDE3Zjc1ZmJiZmFiZTIwMGY)**.
